{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\uc1 \deff2\deflang1033\deflangfe1033{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 02020603050405020304}Times New Roman;}{\f2\fmodern\fcharset0\fprq1{\*\panose 02070309020205020404}Courier New;}
{\f16\froman\fcharset238\fprq2 Times New Roman CE;}{\f17\froman\fcharset204\fprq2 Times New Roman Cyr;}{\f19\froman\fcharset161\fprq2 Times New Roman Greek;}{\f20\froman\fcharset162\fprq2 Times New Roman Tur;}
{\f21\froman\fcharset186\fprq2 Times New Roman Baltic;}{\f28\fmodern\fcharset238\fprq1 Courier New CE;}{\f29\fmodern\fcharset204\fprq1 Courier New Cyr;}{\f31\fmodern\fcharset161\fprq1 Courier New Greek;}{\f32\fmodern\fcharset162\fprq1 Courier New Tur;}
{\f33\fmodern\fcharset186\fprq1 Courier New Baltic;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;
\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\widctlpar\adjustright \f2\cgrid \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 
\additive Default Paragraph Font;}{\s15\widctlpar\adjustright \f2\fs20\cgrid \sbasedon0 \snext15 Plain Text;}{\*\cs16 \additive \ul\cf2 \sbasedon10 Hyperlink;}}{\info{\title II}{\author rachelle warner}{\operator GERALDINE THOMAS}
{\creatim\yr2004\mo11\dy23\hr17\min17}{\revtim\yr2004\mo11\dy23\hr17\min17}{\printim\yr2000\mo6\dy23\hr11\min35}{\version2}{\edmins0}{\nofpages7}{\nofwords3441}{\nofchars19614}{\*\company st. mary's university}{\nofcharsws0}{\vern89}}\margl1319\margr1319 
\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\hyphcaps0\formshade\viewkind4\viewscale100\pgbrdrhead\pgbrdrfoot \fet0\sectd \linex0\endnhere\sectdefaultcl {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}
{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}\pard\plain 
\s15\widctlpar\adjustright \f2\fs20\cgrid {\b\f0\fs24 II.3  History in the Maritimes
\par 
\par        }{\f0\fs24 Nova Scotia became home for one of, if not th
e earliest known Greek immigrant to reach Canada.  The 1861 Nova Scotia census lists a man called John Alexander Greek, of Greek origin, living in Lunenburg County.  That 1861 census also shows him married with six children.  According to the next census 
i
n 1871 two more children arrived in the intervening years.  Direct descendants of John Alexander Greek continue to live in Lunenburg County.  Their family memories and records insist that John Alexander Greek was, in reality, one John Alexander Lavanticis
 
or Levante or Levantakos. (There is no consensus on the spelling of his last name.)  Current members of the Greek family told the author that their ancestor was born in Crete in 1777, arrived in Canada in 1811, married a Rosanna Tanner of Nova Scotia on N
ovember 3}{\f0\fs24\super rd}{\f0\fs24  1814, and died on January 8}{\f0\fs24\super th}{\f0\fs24 
 1868. The old cemetery in Blue Rocks, Lunenburg County used to contain his marked grave, but a fire in the cemetery years ago destroyed all traces of it. According to one family story handed down through the generat
ions, John Alexander had been pressed into the British navy in Europe, but was officially discharged in Halifax.  Another branch of the Greek family insists that he was shipwrecked off Blue Rocks, came to shore, and stayed in the area.  The author thinks 
t
hat both stories could be correct.  It is possible that John Alexander did leave the British ship in Halifax, and became a fisherman working on one of the boats from around the city.  Perhaps it was that boat which came to grief off Blue Rocks, leaving hi
m to make a life for himself in Lunenburg County.  Family stories also say that their ancestor was known around Blue Rocks as \lquote Johnny the Greek\rquote 
, and that he never learned to read and write English.  The author assumes that his problems with English and a name difficult for a census taker to understand caused John Alexander Lavanticis/Levante/Levantakos to be recorded as John Alexander }{
\b\f0\fs24 Greek}{\f0\fs24 . The sixth and seventh generation of John Alexander Greek\rquote s line who live in Lunenburg County appreciate their unique 
heritage with its connection to Greece, but they have long been a part of mainstream Nova Scotian society. 
\par       Population statistics from the early 20}{\f0\fs24\super th}{\f0\fs24  century are imprecise, but they do suggest that in 1901   only a small number of people with Greek a
ncestry were living in Nova Scotia.  Most of these would have been the descendants of John Alexander Greek. The number of Greeks or people of Greek descent had increased to 114 by 1911, inched up to 150 by 1921, and then doubled to 335 by 1941.  In New Br
unswick seven Greeks were listed for 1901, 54 for 1921, and 102 for 1941.  Prince Edward Island figures first showed Greeks in 1911 when 39 were listed, but that number dropped to 10 in 1941. [Current population statistics appear in Chapter II.1 
\ldblquote Greek People Come to Canada\rdblquote .] 
\par 
\par  }{\b\f0\fs24 The Greek Community in Halifax}{\f0\fs24 
\par       Although their numbers were few, we know the names of certain Greek men who were living in Halifax between 1900 and 1925.  Evangelos Protopappas had come from the island of Tenos, Andrew Zafiropo
ulos from Galaxidi, and Panayis Karamanos from the island of Spetsai.  All three were sailors who had left their ships in the port of Halifax.  In 1907 James Karas arrived from the village of Katouna in mountainous Acarnania. (Mr. Karas\rquote 
 daughter, Mrs. Lil
yan Delefes, recounts her story and her memories of the Halifax Greek community below.) Alex Meletides arrived in 1908, and Aristides Meletides in the following year.  In 1910 two brothers, Argyris and Nicholas Petropolis, came to Halifax via Newfoundland
 
from Arcadia, but Argyris soon returned to Greece. While Nicholas Petropolis is best remembered for his ownership of the Empire Theatre, in 1912 Peter, another Petropolis brother, arrived and soon founded the well-known Cameo Restaurant. Gregory Poulos, w
ho had reached Halifax in 1914, joined his Petropolis in-laws in running The Cameo.  A few years later Argyris Lacas became a family member and partner in that restaurant. As the 20}{\f0\fs24\super th}{\f0\fs24 
 century moved on, the owners of The Cameo sponsored numerous Greeks who c
ame to Halifax, worked in the restaurant, and from there went on to open successful businesses of their own. The year 1912 saw the arrival of Thomas Castas from Monasterion in Yugoslavia and Evangelos  (Angelo) Paros from Acarnania. The Alexander brothers
 
who established the Alexander Sweets Shop arrived in Halifax in 1920.  Born in Constantinople, they had first gone to Greece in 1912, but later crossed the Atlantic to settle in Syracuse, New York. From there they came to Canada.  Members of that family a
r
e still very involved in the Halifax Greek community. James Bastas from the island of Euboea arrived in 1916, and soon established the J.B. Coffee Shop on Argyle Street. After his arrival in 1916 Nick G. Aliotis opened first a shoe repair shop, and later 
t
he Diana Cigar Store on Barrington Street. Brothers George and Constantine Manolopoulos from Arcadia were both in Halifax shortly after 1915.  Later each served a distinguished term as president of the Greek Council.  Other names from that early Greek com
munity in Halifax include Theodore Sideris (1915; from Triglia in Asia Minor), Emmanuel Symaeon (1913; from Rhodes), and Joseph Tzagarakis (1914; from Crete). 
\par       It is rather interesting that among the early immigrants only Nick Pappas, who reached Hali
fax in 1913, came from Xerocampi, Laconia, in the southern Peloponnese. Today it seems that almost half of the Halifax Greek community has its roots in that region of southern Greece. Most  Laconians came to Nova Scotia considerably later than the 
\ldblquote first families\rdblquote ; that is they arrived during and after World War II and the subsequent Civil War in Greece.
\par      During the terrible years of World War II the small Halifax Greek community made an outstanding effort to help relieve the suffering caused by war.  In a letter dated March 10, 1943,
\par Rev. E. Athanasiou of St. George\rquote s Church wrote to the Canadian Red Cross Society saying that the entire church collection for that week was being given to the Red Cross.  A second letter signed by thirteen men from the Gre
ek community reads in part: \ldblquote The business men whose names appear below are all Canadian citizens of Greek descent\'85
On the occasion of the current appeal for funds by the Canadian Red Cross we are anxious to assist in every possible way and to show our desir
e by contributing as substantially as possible.  We therefore ask the Canadian Red Cross Society to accept the amount of total sales in our stores on March 16}{\f0\fs24\super th}{\f0\fs24 
 as our donation to its campaign. We propose to deduct nothing. Our employees\rquote  services will be donated and all other expenses will be borne by us. The total of all money in our respective tills will be handed to your representative.\rdblquote 
  The $2,000 this collection raised was an enormous sum for the time.  In a letter to the local newspaper, \ldblquote The Halifax Daily Star\rdblquote 
, the President of the Nova Scotia Red Cross publicly expressed appreciation for this wonderful gesture. His letter says, \ldblquote These men are citizens of whom fellow Canadians may feel the deepest pride.  Their response to national appeals has been
 consistently generous and wholehearted.\rdblquote  
\par       In addition to support for the Red Cross and its worldwide work, the Halifax Greek community collected money and thousands of pounds of used clothing for the Greek War Relief Fund. In a letter dated April 26
,1943 addressed to Mr. Gus Manolopoulos the Hon. G. Depasta of the Royal Greek Legation in Ottawa {\*\bkmkstart _Hlt460928858}{\*\bkmkend _Hlt460928858}said: \ldblquote 
I have learned with national pride of the splendid work done by the Committee under your leadership in the campaign for the C
anadian Red Cross as well as your contribution to the Greek War Relief Fund.  The above acts are praiseworthy and touch every Greek heart, for which in my capacity of Greek Minister in this country, I wish to express to you and through you to the members 
of your Committee and all who contributed in this great humanitarian work, the heartfelt thanks of the Greek Government to which I add my own.  Greece is really proud of all of you.\rdblquote 
\par      The following section presents a number of interviews conducted with some senior members of the Halifax Greek community and/or their families.  In their own words they speak about their lives and the early years of their community.
\par }{\b\f0\fs24 
\par Argyris Lacas
\par }{\f0\fs24      When 100 year-old Argyris Lacas died on December 10, 1997, a remarkable life ended. He had become }{\b\f0\fs24 papou}{\f0\fs24 
 or grandfather not only to his own, beloved family but also to a whole generation of Halifax Greeks. Born in 1896 on the Greek Island of Icaria, which was still under Turkish rule at the time, Mr. Lacas left home at fourteen 
to join his older brother in Alexandria, Egypt.  There he trained as one of the first electricians who helped light the streets of Alexandria.  Although he was successful in Alexandria, Mr. Lacas wanted to be close to his family, most of whom had immigrat
e
d to the United States. Arriving in 1918 at New York's Ellis Island, he had to remain there for six months because quotas for Greek immigrants were full. He moved to Montreal for two years before returning to live in New York and Philadelphia for the next
 
twenty years, where he and his brothers built a successful coffee company.  At present that business is run by the third generation of the family. After coming to Halifax, Mr. Lacas married a local Greek Canadian woman, Dina Petropolis, whom he had met wh
e
n she was visiting her relatives in New York.  Her family had opened The Cameo Restaurant, and Mr. Lacas soon joined the business as a partner.  Later he sold his shares in The Cameo back to the other family members, while he opened his own Doric Restaura
n
t.  Upon retiring from the restaurant business, Mr. Lacas went on to represent Hayes Insurance in Halifax, where he often helped local Greeks with their insurance claims.  From 1959 to 1965 he owned a jewelry business on Spring Garden Road. That particula
r business helped newly arrived Greek jewelers to get started in the Maritimes.  Thus, although Mr. Lacas became a successful businessman in a number of fields, material values never overshadowed his generous nature. 
\par      During the years from 1930 to 1950 the Greek community of Nova Scotia was very small, but very close-knit. Mr. Lacas\rquote 
 memories of those years included frequent barbecues at different homes, with lamb as the favorite dish. Sometimes American Greeks traveled to Halifax to visit relatives the
re.  During the summers several Greek families in Halifax rented cottages so that the women and children could enjoy the countryside and the men could join them on the weekends. 
\par      Mr.Lacas was the oldest member of AHEPA (American Hellenic Educational Progressive Association) in North America and was a co-founder of the organization in Halifax. He loved children.  Martha Zografos, current president of the Halifax Ladies\rquote 
 Philoptochos, remembers that when she was a child, on Sunday afternoons she loved go
ing with her family to meet other local Greek people in the Halifax Gardens or at the Halifax Citadel.  At those gatherings it was always Mr. Lacas who pulled quarters out of his pockets for all the children to go and buy ice cream. Since Argryris Lacas s
o
 enthusiastically promoted the education of the young, after his death the Halifax AHEPA established a regular $1,000 scholarship in his memory. This is given each year to outstanding Greek Canadian students who are entering university. In the 1950s and 1
960s Argyris Lacas was a constant presence at Pier 21 in Halifax, where he met, befriended, and translated for many of the Greek immigrants to Canada. His son-in-law, Takis Kostopoulos remembers this particular incident:  \ldblquote 
 One day I went with my father-in-
law to Pier 21, because we knew Greek immigrants were arriving there.  When we finished with the immigration process for one family, the man tried to give my father-in-law two dollars to show his gratitude. Of course, papou would not take the money and sa
id to the man, \lquote You keep the money. You need it more than I do.\rquote \rdblquote 
\par      Argyris Lacas was a founding member of St. George's Greek Orthodox Church in Halifax, a longtime member of the Church Council, and president of the Council on several occasions. His son-
in-law describes him as a kind, generous, and honourable man who always loved people, and was there to help when they had any kind of trouble. Mr. Kostopoulos said of him, \ldblquote 
My mother-in-law never knew how many people were coming for Sunday dinner, because her husband would always bring someone home with him.\rdblquote  His son, Fokion, remembered how his father was constantly loaning books- particularly the family\rquote 
s encyclopedias to anyone who wanted information. The encyclopedia volumes rarely returned, but Mr. Laca
s just kept buying more.   Some of Argyris Lacas' immediate family continue to live in Halifax and are active, involved members of the Greek community.  They include Mr. Lacas' son, Fokion Peter, Fokion\rquote s wife and children, and Mr. Lacas\rquote 
 daughter, Nina Kostopoulos, her husband and children. 
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\fs24 Lilyan Delefes}{\f0\fs24  
\par       Mrs. G.N. (Lilyan) Delefes is a second-generation Greek Canadian who was born in Halifax. Her father was one of the first Greeks to come to Nova Scotia, and Mrs. Delefes herself is now one of the
 senior members of the Halifax Greek community. Here is her story: 
\par      "My father, James Karas, was a shepherd from Acarnania who came to Halifax shortly after 1900. Before coming to Halifax he had worked on the building of the new Panama Canal. When he 
reached Halifax he worked in a store with another Greek, John Pearl.  When my father expressed the wish to get married, his partner suggested his sister as a good match.  So they sent her a photograph which she apparently tore up in pieces.  She was, howe
ver, gradually coaxed into coming here to marry my father.  They got married in 1911.  My mother, who was born in Naxos, had lived in Constantinople or \ldblquote the Polis\rdblquote 
 for a number of years, and she was at first bitterly disappointed in Halifax.  She found it t
oo remote and quiet compared to a big city like Constantinople.  She was a wonderful seamstress and could do beautiful embroidery.  All I managed to do was to get her sewing machine all muddled up and exhaust her patience.  Another regret I have is not sh
aring her keen interest in cooking.  She brought wonderful recipes from Constantinople.  However, I view cooking more as a necessity than an art.
\par       In Halifax my parents had two children, my brother and me.  Unfortunately they both had to work very hard
, and my father had the Scotia Meat Market, so they did not have much time for us as children.  It seemed that my early childhood fled by so fast, and I remember most fondly my leisurely visits to aunts in New Brunswick who had no children of their own an
d loved to have us.  I am sure that my mother had a lot more to offer us, if she had had the time to sit down and think. 
\par      When I reached school age, I was sent to the Convent of the Sacred Heart in Halifax.  At that time it was a boarding school.  Admi
ttedly, it gave me a good education, but as a result of not being home, my Greek was suffering, and, of course, I have never learned to read or write Greek to this day.  Also, being so close to other Canadian girls who were allowed to have boyfriends, whe
n I was not, made it rather difficult for me.  Another way in which I felt I was different was the fact that I belonged to a small minority in Halifax.  There were only about twenty-five Greek families here.
\par      As I was growing up, I remember that we had 
a lot of dances and social functions among the Greek people.  We never had a church until the 1930s, but we had a hall, and that was where we used to congregate.  The men used the hall like a kafenion every evening.  They would go there, leaving their wiv
e
s to take care of the children and the store, and they would drink their coffee, talk to their friends, play cards, and spend a pleasant hour or two.  A priest would come to Halifax, if there were a wedding, christening, or a funeral.  I remember having l
o
ts of fun at christenings or wedding parties. During one of the Greek dances I saw this very tall, handsome, Greek officer who was in the Greek Merchant Navy.  I was introduced to him, and I noticed that he wore a black tie, and that he was not in the moo
d
 to dance.  When we talked, I found out that a landmine had just killed his younger brother. He also told me about his parents who used to live in Smyrna in Asia Minor where his father had a tobacco business.  They were very well off, but disaster struck 
t
hem.  Leaving their father behind, the rest of the family was forced by the Turks to abandon Smyrna and go to Athens. His mother died shortly after they reached Greece. His father came to join them later in Athens, where he was shocked to find them in a r
efugee camp.  
\par          Anyway, I eventually married the handsome, Greek sailor and we had about a year and a half together.  As World War II went on, my husband had to leave our eight-month-old son, Peter, and me.  He never returned.  In February 1944 his ship, the 
\lquote Aikaterini\rquote 
, sank in the Bay of Fundy with the loss of the whole crew of twenty-six seamen. I went back to live with my parents.  My parents were good to me, but I started to think that I could not depend on them forever.  So when my son went to
 school, I decided to train as an x-ray technician.  This enabled me to get a job and become more independent.  I looked after my parents as long as they were alive, and when they died I was able to give my son a good life.  I never married again, but I h
ave no regrets."
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\fs24 Maria Georgakakos
\par        }{\f0\fs24 Mrs. Maria Georgakakos talked about her early years and first impressions of Canadian life: 
\par       "I came to Canada in 1958, because my fianc\'e9 had come here for better job opportunities after the end of World War II and the Civil War in Greece.  After a nine-month delay I reached Canada with my fianc\'e9
's younger sister. On December 9, 1958 we came through Pier 21 to find the Greek priest and my fianc\'e9 waiting to welcome us.  My first impression of Halifax was very p
ositive.  I liked the small houses, and it was the first time that I had seen snow.  It was also the first time that I had seen so many decorations for Christmas. The week after I arrived, we went to City Hall and we signed our marriage license.  We got m
arried on December 25th, Christmas Day, because that was the only day that my fianc\'e9
 had off work.  After we were married, I remember that I would wait for my husband to come home for lunch at noon as we did in Greece. However, my husband told me that this 
was not the way things worked here, and he would come home later in the day for supper. Eventually I got used to it.
\par      On December 29}{\f0\fs24\super th}{\f0\fs24 , right after our wedding, I went to work for a Greek restaurant where I was responsible for the cash
 register, because it was the only position that did not need language skills. At this point I didn't know any English.  I worked during the night and my husband worked during the day.  Once, my boss told me to wash the windows inside and out, but because
 
of the snow and the cold air, I could not get them clean. I was almost crying with worry.  I worked for some time at the restaurant, but because I did not know the language, I could not keep up with the work.  Then I went to work for Koolex Kleaners.  I s
tarted to learn a little bit of English with the help of my Greek and Canadian friends.  Meanwhile, I was pregnant with my first child and I worked up to the last week of my pregnancy, because we needed the money.  They used to call my first son 
\ldblquote Koolexaki\rdblquote , because I worked so long in my pregnancy. Then after the baby was born, I started working at another restaurant doing the night shift, and my family would baby-sit for me.  We never took days off or went on vacations. 

\par      This hard life made us homesic
k, but we could not leave and go back to Greece, because we did not have enough money, and we were determined to make it work.  My husband would tell me to have patience, so we could learn the language and save up enough money to buy our own business.  To
 
do that we hardly spent any money. We were seven people in a two-bedroom flat with a kitchen and a common bathroom.  But we supported each other as a family.  Then my husband and I had our second child, a baby girl.  We baptized both the children together
,
 because we did not have enough money to spend for two separate celebrations.  We worked harder still and in February 1961, we bought our own snack bar. We had gone to the bank, and taken out all our savings, and the bank gave us a loan.  All the family w
orked together in the snack bar.  Then we started to bring other members of our families to Canada, because here in Canada we had better job opportunities.
\par Through the Immigration Department we gradually brought eighty family members to Canada.
\par      We all 
continued to work so hard, and when we saved enough money from the snack bar we bought our first home.  We always helped our relatives who came to Canada to buy homes and businesses.  After we had our third child, a boy, we wanted our children to know mor
e about their Greek heritage and language. That was when we brought our mothers over, and started to go back to Greece to see the relatives there. 
\par       I always had the support of my family and friends. We have Canadian as well as Greek friends.  We have 
helped some of our waitresses at Gus' Pub and Grill save enough to get homes of their own and our former snack bar had now been upgraded to a restaurant.  Although my husband already has his pension and I get it later this year, we still like working in o
u
r restaurant because that way we get to meet all our friends.  The hours of work do remain long, and eight to fourteen hour days are still the norm.  Today our youngest son is involved with us in the business, and he will probably carry on with that for t
he foreseeable future. Looking back now, I am pleased that I came to Canada after those bad times in Greece. But I still have a problem with the English language and I don't understand it as well as I do Greek."
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\fs24 Callie and Takis Iatrou
\par       }{\f0\fs24 Callie and Tak
is Iatrou were, and are, two of the most involved members of the Halifax Greek community.  Mr. Takis Iatrou is a past president of the Greek Church Council, and his wife, Callie,    has been the principal of the Greek School and director of the church cho
ir for many years..
\par       As a second-generation Greek Canadian, Callie Iatrou was born and raised in Halifax.  Her father, George Alexander, was one of the first Greeks to immigrate to Nova Scotia in the early part of the 20}{\f0\fs24\super th}{\f0\fs24 
 century. He had returned to G
reece where he married Fanoula Melas from Athens.  About 1932 Mr. and Mrs. Alexander came back to Halifax, where they settled permanently. For years Fanoula Alexander was one of the most active ladies in the Halifax Greek community. Talking about growing 
up in Halifax in the 1940s, Callie Iatrou said, \ldblquote My parents were very strict.  I remember that when I wanted to go to the prom at Queen Elizabeth High which I was attending, my parents wouldn\rquote 
t let me attend until one of my male cousins agreed to take me.  
When the other girls talked about their boyfriends, we Greek girls felt uncomfortable, because our parents would not let us date.  We also felt uncomfortable talking about our Greek background back then because people were often not very open in dealing w
ith different nationalities.\rdblquote  Callie Iatrou did enjoy growing up in Halifax\rquote s small Greek community. \ldblquote 
We used to get together at the Greek Church on Morris Street once a week to play Ping-Pong and bridge. The choir practiced every week, and since I was only
 ten, I was the youngest member of the choir.  We always had large gatherings for our national Greek holidays where we performed the plays and dances of Greece.\rdblquote  After high school Mrs. Iatrou went to Saint Basil\rquote 
s Greek American Teachers College in Garrison, New York in order to become a teacher. She said, \ldblquote It was among the best years of my life.\rdblquote 
\par        Mr. Takis Iatrou came to Canada in the early 1950s from the city of Megalopolis in the Peloponnese because of the wars and political crisis in Greece.  Going first to Montreal, he worked in a Greek restaurant there for two years.  \ldblquote 
It was the only job that I could do which required few language skills, since I knew no English or French.  Another reason was the fact that I had to repay my ticket to the person
 who had paid for me to come to Canada.  After a couple of years a friend of mine was opening a new business here in Halifax, so he asked me if I would come to Halifax and help with that.\rdblquote 
 After arriving in Halifax, Mr. Iatrou soon met his future wife, Cal
lie, and the couple were married in 1956.  The Iatrous told us that the Halifax Greek community at the time was so small that all twenty-seven Greek families living in the city were invited to their wedding.
\par         Mr. Iatrou went on to say that even after some years of working in the family restaurant in Halifax, language was still a problem for him. \ldblquote 
I went to the YMCA once a week to learn English.  Our good customers and my wife also helped me with the language. Then our children were born and things be
came easier.  Since both my wife and I worked, the children stayed with their grandparents.  For long periods they also went to Greece to stay with their grandmother there.  We wanted them to learn the culture and language of Greece.  Sometimes that made 
trouble for them with English, but when they went back to school here they picked it up very easily.\rdblquote 
\par        In 1963 Mr. Iatrou became president of the Greek community.  After his term as president he remained on the church council for several years. Becaus
e the community was growing, their main focus was to improve the facilities of the Greek School which enrolled about forty to fifty students. In the 1970s the Greek school grew to around 160 students. Callie Iatrou told us that in the 1960s and 70s it see
m
ed that the Greek community was becoming more accepted by the non-Greek population.  She attributes this in part to the more prominent face which the Greeks presented to the wider, non-Greek population by events such as the sponsorship of a Greek Day at S
aint Patrick\rquote s High School. Public officials at the civic and provincial levels also showed their willingness to assist the Greek community with resources for the Greek School and financial help with the new community centre.
\par 
\par }{\b\f0\fs24 
\par 
\par }{\f0\fs24 
\par 
\par     
\par }}